it's easy to say beauties in the other
beholder and the beauty is of social
construct that it's to some extent
specific to the culture of living it but
if you just live in one culture you may
really be stuck with that struggle
you're stuck with the way you're you're
perceived in that culture I also think
that in Western culture we cultivate
this misconception it's a misconception
we're proud of that human attraction and
para bonding is based on the soul or
that it ought to be based on the soul it
ought to be based on who you really are
and we imagine who you really are
is something totally different from just
who you are that combines with the
anecdotal nature of oh this one time had
this one experience where this person
really found me attractive I had this
one experience or this person fell in
love with me like you guys had a deeper
connection with someone and then and
then adding to this delusion of those
people those people who were really
enter into me it's because they they
could see who I really am it's cuz they
could see my soul they saw something in
me the other people didn't see and I
think that is wrong wrong wrong
but the real moral of the story of what
I'm saying here is that the discipline
of making sense of your own love life is
keeping the shallow things shallow like
appreciating the shallow side of human
experience as shallow you know if you're
a cancer researcher you do research to
try to find the cure for cancer and then
you meet someone else who's also
passionate about cancer research how
important is their physical appearance
gonna be it's gonna be different for
every couple it's gonna be different for
a person whether you're thinking about
yourself you know it's a unique example
in this process or if you're scaling up
and thinking about society in general or
or life in general you know yeah of
course if you care about something
passionately whether or not it's cancer
research whether or not it's you know
painting or what-have-you well then it's
politics without you and you meet
someone else who relates to you on that
level who has those common aspirations
with you there's a lot to love there I
mean there's just there's a lot of
common ground to build on and I do think
it's something I mean if you are if you
are objective
ugly witch you know funny people are
funny people live with that burden their
whole lives you know or if within your
own culture you're considered ugly
you're within a culture we're only tall
skinny people are considered attractive
and you're not tall and skinny whatever
the case might be nevertheless it seems
so clear to me that the way forward is
for you to find and build on you know
some passionate direction that kind
which is gonna create the basis for
those those meaningful relationships I
think that a lot of people get behind
this competitive view of evolutionary
biology like everyone's trying to be as
pretty as possible everyone's trying to
be as handsome and as muscular as
possible and so on because it gives them
the comforting delusion that there's one
finish line one standard one set of goal
posts that we're working towards that
presumes that you know the nature of the
competition and you know what it is that
you're competing for right I could not
imagine the woman that YouTube brought
into my life like there was no way I
could have contrived my life or put on a
fake persona or done a fake career or
anything to try to attract you as my
partner right I can work on developing
when I'm really interested and
passionate about and then I can find out
who has common ground with me like I
didn't even know about you for the first
couple months were together that one of
these you really related to was my
interest in First Nations people's so
crea ghibli den a native peoples of
Canada native languages and stuff right
and I'm coming here on YouTube just
talking about that from the position of
a failure you know I mean it's like hey
this is something I tried to do with my
life and it didn't work out and that you
know that brought this woman in my life
that was one of the things that really
turned her on a boat me that she really
related to you positively right so
nobody's gonna give you that advice like
talk about your aspirations and failures
and meet people who can relate
positively to that aspiration and
failure but it's great advice
bad news Yin one of the ideas that comes
out of the philosophy of Karl Popper is
just the extent to which empirical
experience can lead us astray so Karl
Popper was a philosophy or a philosopher
of science tried to make them the one
word there he was a loser science and
naturally in the flaws
science a lot of people say well what's
good about science is that it's based on
what you see and hear and experience
empirically and Karl Popper was
interested in kind of examples to the
contrary well you know empirical
experience going to eat astray and
sometimes we have to reason things
through in a more theoretical or
abstracted philosophical sense in order
to interpret what we see empirically now
like a lot of people's relationship
advice or how they live their own lives
in terms of seeking a partner or having
a partner to have you it's based on a
few very powerful empirical experiences
like it may be based on their own
experience falling in love which is
maybe something them once in their life
maybe twice maybe not even right at the
time of this matters it may be based on
a friend of theirs falling in love it
may be based on someone else falling in
love with them or even just someone
being attracted to you you know which is
really random and can be very misleading
like if you're not gorgeous whether
you're like objectively ugly or you're
objectively mediocre looking you may
have the experience that stands out in
your mind of a few times in your life
when somebody met you and forever they
they were really into you they found you
really attractive you know that happens
to most of us even if you're not that
good-looking you know a few times in
your life and then it's really easy to
kid yourself like oh I just need to like
repeat the circumstances that created
that situation you know what I mean and
so it's an empirical experience it may
be very powerful and you know your best
friend you may have seen them fall in
love or seen someone fall in love with
them or again even if there wasn't even
love even it was just someone who met
you on a certain day in a certain way
and they were really into you it's easy
to take that as a guide for you what you
should be doing when really the exact
opposite is true it's it's very random
on a human face to face level who finds
you attractive and there is no why there
is no reason why like I mean you know it
is it is kind of surprising to me how
much my current girlfriend finds me
attractive and like hey I got I got a
real good comparison so my girlfriend
doesn't
find me attractive in real life but like
we'll be looking through photographs
with me like photographs we took
together in rolling munication and
she'll say oh wow you look really
handsome in that photo and I think I
look like garbage in the photo like I I
know some photos of me are flattering it
some are unflattering but like a really
unflattering photo of me she will still
think I'm hot in this in this awful
photo of me right now I remember by
contrast when I was a student in
conveying one of my teachers especially
you know photographs of my more up like
you know I made this poster a red but
you know and also we had to all the ID
stuff we had like my passport you know
just part of the school so different
photos we were on the table at different
times of study and I remember she really
went out of her way to let me know how
ugly I looked in these photographs of me
or some she'd be like oh that doesn't
look like you at all like about fuzz and
it like you know it was like wow you
know cuz like again some of the photos
that look bad but some of them I look at
that photo looks terrible you know so I
mean it's it's very idiosyncratic who
finds who finds who attractive and so so
we're currently living in China it's
easy to say beauty is in the eye of the
beholder and the beauty is of social
construct that it's to some extent
specific to the culture living it but if
you just live in one culture you may
really be stuck with that struggle
you're stuck with the way your you're
perceived in that culture I don't know
if I mentioned this to you before but
like most wall okay China is a huge
country when I lived in Hong Kong nobody
found me attractive
nobody even referred to me as attractive
and I mean two different categories
there cuz like there's someone walking
up to you on the street right now at a
cocktail party and like hitting on you
letting you know that they find you if
that's one type of information but
another type information is like
conversations with your boss or your
coworkers where they refer to you as
attractive look or even just the nature
of the conversation it's like oh well or
you're doing this event whatever when I
was in Hong Kong nobody found me
attractive and then just a couple years
later my parents was the same or worse I
think I was probably object
less attractive when I was living in
Kunming China this is back in 2007
everyone found me attractive and it gave
us kind of both categories they were
both like all these women directly
hitting on me directly like Sun is
directly propositioning me but you know
trying to spark up with me but also
those cousin direct conversations with
co-workers and colleagues and that kind
of thing whereas being referred to as
like self-evident that I was really
attractive you know for this and this
both China and I looked the same in
those two periods in my life you know
what I mean is it is a cultural context
is it just luck like is it just I do
singers is just random you know what I
mean but the difference there was not me
if anything I was better looking in the
period when I was living in Hong Kong I
was I was really broke when I was living
in conveying poverty poverty never
attractive I had a beard part of that
time too and stuff you know anyway
whatever so you know it's really really
easy to let these kind of anecdotal
experiences lead you astray whether
they're your own anecdotal experience or
there's someone else's anything
experienced now on a deeper level I also
think that in Western culture we
cultivate this misconception it's a
misconception we're proud of that human
attraction and para bonding is based on
the soul or that it ought to be based on
the soul it ought to be based on who you
really are and we imagine who you really
are is something totally different from
just who you are like you know what you
do what you say your job your hobbies
your interest these are extrinsic and
shallow things and what you look like
your appearance and then there's this
idea there's this separate category of
who you really are your spirit your soul
your intrinsic essence that allegedly
somebody who wants to you should be
able to appreciate even if it's in great
contrast to who you are you know in a
shallower sense now these things can can
overlap the the latter delusion the
delusion of the soul what I call an
essentialist approach to human
personality there's an essence within
your personality which is your true self
in contrast to your false so firstly
that combines with the anecdotal
nature of oh this one time had this one
experience where this person really
failed me attractive I had this one
experience or this person fell in love
with me like you know she had a deeper
connection with someone and then and
then adding to this delusion of those
people those people who were really
enter into me it's because they they
could see who I really am it's cuz they
could see my soul they saw something in
me the other people didn't see and I
think that is wrong wrong wrong you see
the same thing my Chinese teacher saw
both in person and in the photographs
right you like it
and she doesn't you think it's
attractive
she thinks it's repulsive period you
don't mean you're responding to the same
man and the same outward experience and
the same combination of different
shallow factors that makes up you know
who you are what you have to offer as a
partner you know blah blah blah I mean
you know I'm talking about this in a
philosophical way but the real moral of
the story of what I'm saying here is
that the discipline of making sense that
your own love life is keeping the
shallow things shallow like appreciating
the shallow side of human experience as
shallow not looking for something deep
where it or it can't be found
you know if somebody gives you the
advice which is maybe maybe common
advice but isn't maybe isn't taken
seriously enough despite being in common
that you should find someone you love
you should base your relationship on on
developing common interests I noticed
you have in common now I think in a
really profound sense this runs counter
to the the cultural idea of the soul the
essence of who you really are and it
also runs counter to this notion that
like society is one big competition for
who's the prettiest and that it's the
most attractive people trying to pair
off at the most attractive people to
have the most attractive children or
something I really do not think that's
that's what's going on I mean
there's thousands of examples of sure
rich unattractive people getting
together with attractive people to prove
that huh yeah I think the point is I
learned to unattractive people getting
deals right sure ugly people get laid
and ugly people have happy marriages and
what I do mean straight up ugly people I
think a lot of people are may be scared
of the feeling within themselves that
they could fall in love with an ugly
person I think that's partly an ego trip
like I am i lowering my social value am
I am I you know is am i damaging my own
ego or my own worth if my girlfriend is
less attractive than some standard I
have set up in my mind or for the woman
if her boyfriend is slower than some
Jennifer but you know you can fall in
love with someone who's objectively
unattractive I think and I think you can
fall in love with someone who's
subjectively unattractive you know who
you don't feel attracted to but you
overcome that because of some
combination of other redeeming qualities
they've got but maybe that's maybe
that's scary to people and its own way
too right yeah you know what does it
really mean creating and building on on
common interests I think that's
basically as deep as it gets for this
kind of relationship advice you know if
you're a cancer researcher you do
research to try to find the cure for
cancer and then you meet someone else
who's also passionate about cancer
research how important is their physical
appearance gonna be it's gonna be
different for every couple it's gonna be
different for a person I'm not here to
shame those people they're probably it's
possible someone's watching this video
right now I was in a specialized field
like that and they said well all my life
I assumed that wanted to be with another
cancer researcher but when I actually
met these women or actually met these
men I found I couldn't feel attracted
the middle fine you know and I think for
some people you know the question of
whether or not they can feel attracted
someone might be really narrow you know
they might they might only be able to
feel attracted to someone if certain
certain conditions are met it's a
certain type certain look or what have
you and you know there's no reason to
lie to yourself about that but I think
you also shouldn't lie to yourself the
other way whether you're thinking about
yourself you know is a unique exam
in this process or if you're scaling up
and thinking about society in general or
or life in general you know yeah of
course if you care about something
passionately whether or not it's cancer
research whether or not it's you know
painting or what-have-you
well then that's politics without you
and you meet someone else who relates to
you on that level who has those common
aspirations with you there's a lot to
love there I mean there's just there's a
lot of common ground to build on there's
a lot you know there's a lot that's
gonna smooth over and make it worthwhile
for you to move into an apartment
together and learn learn how to get
along and have your first experience
washing dishes together and have your
first fight about the dry cleaning or
who forgot to return their library books
because you know they're all kinds of
little bumps in the road you know when
you're a couple she smiles you know I'm
sober but you know we have something
profound and enduring some kind of
common ground like that some kind of
interest in common that I mean that
really creates the basis for the
relationship and I do think it's
something I mean if you are if you are
objectively ugly which you know plenty
of people are plenty people live with
that burden their whole lives you know
or if within your own culture you're
considered ugly you're within a culture
we're only tall skinny people are
considered attractive and you're not
tall and skinny whatever the case might
be and that again that can be quite
localized that could be the sense of
competition your own culture or may just
be the sense you're left over with from
your own high school who you know a lot
of people are shaped by little
experiences like that that are really
even more specific than their culture in
general or where they're living in
general nevertheless it seems so clear
to me that the way forward is for you to
find and build on you know some
passionate direction that kind which is
going to create the basis for those
those meaningful relationships all right
sorry two or three things to take onto
this two or three you know Cabot's I
think are really significant so one I
used to be married to an anthropologist
I used to marry to someone who had a PhD
in anthropology I think it's actually
worthwhile to reflect that yeah
sometimes you can have an interest in
common with somebody and it seems like a
common interest but it's really not
because what you're talking about is
such a diverse category of things for
which we use just one word in the
English language so I can through Paula
G my ex-wife
who were her co-workers and colleagues
and anthropology
some of them are Christian missionaries
there are people with PhDs in
anthropology but they're going out to
tribal areas and trying to convert
ethnic minority people's Christian for
them that's the meaning of life but it's
like well what do you have in common
anthropology or even a PhD anthropology
and there were a lot of people
anthropology who were left-wing
extremists who were communists who
supported the Communist Party and for
whom anthropology is really about you
know proven communism now I use an
example I know nothing about when I say
cancer research I can't tell you
probably if you talk to people who are
really in the cancer research dating
pool I think a lot of labels like that
you're gonna have one word in English
language but then when you look past
that it's really not just one interest
it's not common ground that's easy to
build on when you really understand that
people with very diverse motives and
interests are brought in under that one
tent are brought in under that one that
one heading so you have to look beyond I
mean anthropology may be an extract an
exceptionally bad example but I think
that's an example worth thinking about
and for people to question themselves
their own interest if they're going to
conferences or meetings or events for
that interest and the pursuit of that
interest or they really meaning think
people they have things that are
profound
they have profoundly comment so we're
both vegan but we have a lot more in
common than just veganism right like if
you make a list of all the examples all
the specific political issues addressed
on this channel so she got to see a
couple hundred of my YouTube videos
before she met me in person so she knew
we had all this in common right a
surprising amount of things that come
yeah I mean wait it was surprise for me
I learned it that you learned it first
cuz you watch the YouTube videos I mean
that yeah yeah yeah well also you know
earlier you said like she smiles you
know cuz I'm not laughing about us not
being able to get along with washing
dishes it's just a process surprisingly
we've been really sure we've been able
to get along really well you've been
copacetic
yeah copacetic is the word you know you
can say in terms of us having on stuff
in common it would be hard to make a
full list of all those issues but it's
like we're both into veganism or not
industry protests we're not into
smashing windows or not as a now there
was drink or do drugs yeah that is true
oh no that's also a huge one sure we're
both basically anti-drug and
yeah a cheetah back home idea right we
both don't watch hockey even there's an
enormous list of things we have in
common but my phone is gonna be just
within the vegan category like you know
okay we both we both don't want to adopt
dogs we don't that's a huge one so like
there are people in our Facebook groups
which are just vegans who are heavily
into pet ownership where they're all
their time is devoted to they have six
dogs and five rabbits and they've
rescued a bunch of rats you know there
are people who have rats in their
apartment there people are raising
chickens you know there are vegans but
where their time is running this small
farm you know inside their apartment or
in their backyard we're not like that
we're not just into it for the health
reasons - right okay that's another
great example right so like my point is
your whether it's anthropology including
everything from like conservative
Christians to left-wing extremist
communists or it's veganism veganism
seems really specific but when you get
down to it like okay you want a date you
want to meet someone else because
they're a vegan activist or an aspiring
vegan activist well what does that
really mean you know and politically or
practically like you know I don't I
literally don't think I could live with
a woman who had a bunch of pets I don't
want to live in the same space with with
a bunch of animals like that but you
know and it's not hard to think of you
know a parallel universe where that I
ended up in that situation right but no
so yeah even within veganism though
there are those there are those kinds of
questions to dig down to uh I mean this
is this issue of common interests of
having kind of an own declared common
interest and you're then kind of dating
inside that that interest I think it
really does run counter to this notion
of the the essential self the soul the
spirit who you really are
right and I think at the other hand I
mean I'm gonna use my own my own
experience getting married getting
divorced to it you know in a
self-critical way there um you know you
can say when my ex-wife met me I was a
scholar of Buddhism you know now she
wasn't but she respected that she wanted
know more about that she knew she knew
basically nothing about Buddhism when
she met me she had met some other people
she had met some people and her PhD
program who you know also at some
engagement with Buddhism so you know you
could really say that I let her down
or that I you know we can validate it
part of the basis for the relationship
when I ceased to be a scholar of
Buddhism when I quit that field and
moved into a new field right now Mike
Smith has never ever said that to me
she's never said like she fell out of
love with me or start felt differently
about me regarded me differently
because I stopped being a scholar of
Buddhism and I assume we'll never have a
conversation like that now that we're
divorced you know there were a million
other things that happened everybody
there were a million other factors to
consider but nevertheless I've got to
say self-fertile I think that is a
reason to leave me I think that is a
reason to break up relation I think you
can say well look the common interests
or what part of the base relationship
was for whatever ten years plus I was a
scholar of Buddhism I worked on pally
we're gonna set these Dasia this kind of
stuff and then that all came to a halt
and she was very much part of those
discussions not like I sprung it on her
as a surprise but again there's nothing
intrinsic here there's nothing essential
I'm not in a position to say to my
ex-wife well you're supposed to love me
for me you're supposed to love me for
who I really am and supposed to love me
for my solar spirit no you fell in love
with a with a Pali scholar with a
scholar of tera vaada Buddhism and now
I'm stopping that listen for the rest of
my life like I'm it's not a temp or
everything like I'm quitting that field
and I'm going another you know the
directions now I think a lot of people
are made to feel ashamed of that in
Christian culture like if you fall in
love with your husband because he has a
good job as an aircraft pilot and then
later his vision gets worse he can't be
an aircraft pilot anymore you're
supposed to feel like a piece of
because you married him because he's an
aircraft pilot now you don't want to be
with him anymore that he's not like you
know I understand like there's a thing
there it's and I think it is based on
this like Christian culture of suffering
and support like no like you're supposed
to have this profound connection with
this guy that has nothing to do with the
fact that he's an aircraft but you got
to be real with yourself maybe it does
you know that's what attracted to you
were that was the basis for the
relationship I don't know maybe the
husband's an aircraft pilot and the wife
works in aircraft design or engineering
or craft engine repair whatever I mean I
don't know why but now he's no longer in
that field he's doing Santilli if it's
like that matters that's not you know
intrinsic or essential or
happy okay I think that a lot of people
get behind this competitive view of
evolutionary biology like everyone's
trying to be as pretty as possible
everyone's trying to be as handsome and
as muscular as possible and so on
because it gives them the comforting
delusion that there's one finish line
one standard one set of goal posts that
we're all working towards like there's
one standard of beauty and the struggle
is to be as beautiful as possible or
there's one standard of success like
commercial success and we're working
towards it and you know maybe that makes
sense to be bowls in terms of the high
school experience like in your high
school maybe there were only five or ten
people you find attractive and then
there's a sense of a closed competition
you know for these limited resources of
who can be the handsomest or the
strongest of the prettiest of the most
successful and only a couple ways to be
successful like maybe you can be
successful in sports or something like
bodybuilding and maybe you can be
successful in getting high grades or
seeming promising in terms of your
career options this is really limited
horizons really limited form of
competition now there's a sense in which
even high school is not really like that
that's just one way to perceive high
school but definitely once you join the
adult world it's not like that um you
know a lot of people it seems like
harmless advice you just say well be as
fit as you can possibly be be as pretty
as you can possibly be as strong as you
can possibly as lean or as muscular or
whatever these these things are that
presumes that you know the nature of the
competition and you know what it is that
you're competing for right I could not
imagine the woman that YouTube brought
in my life like there was no way I could
have contrived my life or put on a fake
persona or done a fake career or
anything to try to attract you as my
partner right I came on YouTube I kept
it really real I talked about my actual
political beliefs that were alienating
to a lot of people like a lot of people
look my political beliefs and they thing
it's the left wing is he right wing
what's the deal with this guy you know
my political leaves don't fall into some
simple you know box my views on veganism
alienate the vast majority of vegans the
best if he gets why
my views on veganism offensive those
honest about that stuff there's no sense
in which I can say like I'm out here
trying to be the best version of myself
you heard that like you really got
to think about that that's that's a mode
of thinking where there's already a
presumed ideal you're working words
whether it's a finish line or goal posts
or standard standard of beauty or
standard of success you know I can work
on developing what I'm really interested
and passionate about and then I can find
out who has common ground with me like I
didn't even know about you for the first
couple months were together that one of
the things you really related to was my
interest in First Nations peoples so
crea jib way then a native peoples of
Canada native languages and stuff right
and I'm coming here on YouTube just
talking about that from the position of
a failure you know I mean it's like hey
this is something I tried to do with my
life and it didn't work out and that you
know that brought this woman in my life
that was one of the things that really
turned her on about me that she really
related to you positively right so
nobody's gonna give you that advice like
talk about your aspirations and failures
and meet people who can relate
positively to that aspiration and
failure but it's great advice
you mean sorry this is I think the
really the final point you can jump in
if you got some say but you know this is
really the final point I want to make
here one of the really interesting
dynamic things is that this this issue
of common ground as a basis for romance
love etc it doesn't just rely on things
you've actually accomplished so before I
hit record I mean I mentioned to my
girlfriend look you know we've fallen in
love we have this now really stable high
commitment long-term relationship and
part of the basis is that at the time we
met I was an aspiring vegan activist and
she was an aspiring vegan activist what
have we actually accomplished in terms
of those aspirations almost nothing and
it's it's completely possible that due
to circumstance in the future what will
we accomplish in future in terms of our
aspirations for unites them the answer
may be nothing like it maybe we both
just get jobs the demand our attention
24/7 the do - you don't professional or
family obligations okay let's say my mom
gets sick and then we decided to take
care of
in the last couple of years of her life
or something in a role Dejan illness and
you get pregnant and I get a job at the
CIA like you know whatever and you know
the CIA says look we don't like your
doing this YouTube in your spare
time you know whatever you know whatever
the scenario is okay nevertheless we
were brought together by that positive
aspiration and we'll stay together like
it doesn't rely on us pursuing that and
it doesn't rely on any actual
accomplishments right and the First
Nations thing I think is a really
powerful example that also like to some
extent she knows who I am
she knows what kind of person I am she
does what I'm gonna do what I'm capable
of because of my experience trying to do
something positive for First Nations
First Nations languages even though what
I accomplished was like this much and I
can make a video talking about that you
know what I mean that was basically a
failure I enrolled the First Nations
University where and I just had videos
on YouTube talking about my feelings
under that heading you know to me
there's no promise of me accomplished in
there but the fact that I cared about
that the fact that I tried to accomplish
that and then you know about that you
relate to that that's also part of the
positive basis the relationship but it
doesn't rely on any actually existing
thing it doesn't rely on me having money
in the bank or me driving a fancy car or
you know me having the right tattoos or
me being able to benchpress 300 pounds
etc etc doesn't rely on me every once so
that's a really interesting dynamic and
I you know I think there I think there
are pretty clear reasons to why that is
when you fall in love with someone you
want to have a sense of who they are you
want to have a sense of who in future
they're gonna become you want to have a
sense of their of their potential you
know you want to is this someone who's
gonna end up as a lazy drunk watching
sports on the couch that's a big
percentage of guys you know they may
look good in high school ten years later
the guy's a lazy drunk you know in high
school he was lean and muscular and was
on the football team ten years later
he's drinking beer on the couch watching
some but some other football team it's a
very common pattern for men right you
know their potential through their that
what kind of a partner they can be and
what they were
do in life a lot of that is about those
intangibles although again those
intangibles I think it's really
important to view them as shallow not to
think of them in terms of the soul of
the spirit or something
essential but just as those common
interests and what you can build on that
is everything I have to say okay we
killed this video is done okay well this
was this was more flattering than
denigrating to you in our relationship
no I think this gives a give you that's
rapid evolution